{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1036{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.18362}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang12 De Tia Kansara \'e0 tout le monde:  09:39 AM\par
David, who at the CA can we connect with to create a solution for using existing discharges for potential innovation?\par
De Rob Westaway \'e0 tout le monde:  09:51 AM\par
These maps and the associated publication do not include raw data or sources of these data. Might it be possible please to provide these? It would make the work that has been done far more useful and will mean that other researchers will not have to repeat the work that you have done.\par
De Chris Satterley \'e0 tout le monde:  09:51 AM\par
Hi Tia, you can contact the team at the Coal Authority via our mine energy inbox mineenergy@coal.gov.uk\par
De Billy Andrews \'e0 tout le monde:  09:53 AM\par
Hi David, \par
Billy Andrews from the University of Strathclyde. I really enjoyed your talk and you pretty much summarised my current thinking that I'm currently writing up. \par
One thing I thought was worth mentioning is seam & inter-seam geological properties that can have a large effect on several of the limiting factors (collapse, enhanced fracture networks above LW workings etc) and often overlooked. These properties also effect geological deformation, which could have an additional effect on flow pathways. \par
I was wondering what your opinion is on how we best communicate the complicated system to an audience who may not be accustom to the idea/degree of subsurface uncertainty? PS I agree ventilation doors (or fire doors in gassy seams), represent a significant unknown.   \par
De Simon Lucas \'e0 tout le monde:  09:53 AM\par
Morning Gareth - one of your slides showed a water temperature up to 70 degC at 1800m  depth. Could you comment which area this data point is from? Thanks Simon Lucas\par
-----------------------------------\par
\par
Ruth Buckley 09:19 AM  \par
a question for Steven - have you a feel for how environmentally damaging the production of batteries is in comparison to other energy solutions?\par
Steven Hayes (Hayestec) 09:53 AM \par
Thanks Ruth,\par
\par
While i mentioned lithium ion in the presentation there are many battery solutions being explored presently that have the potential to be better for the environment, you wont find these in your phone due them being less energy dense (you'd probably need a wheelbarrow for your phone battery). However for grid on scale where space is available they can be a viable alternative. My view is that improved regulation in lithium (and cobolt) production would improve the negative environmental impacts but rarely is a solution perfect.\par
David Kemp 09:23 AM  \par
Steven's ambient loop - is this based on 'natural' minewater temp flow with individual domestic heat pumps or does it requiere plant to raise the ambient loop to a higher flow?\par
Steven Hayes (Hayestec) 10:00 AM \par
Thanks David,\par
It would be based on natural minewater temperature, the lower temperature opens more opportunity to capture waste heat in that ambient loop. With regard to domestic properties each area is different and a substation uplifting the temperature might be required, for example if space constaints exist in properties.\par
Tia Kansara 09:23 AM  \par
Steven/ \par
\par
Q1_Lithium battery are incredibly harmful for the environment, because of their extreme water-needs. What alternatives to Lithium-ion do you recommend? Or is in research that would be good to explore?\par
\par
Q2_A two-peak demand was pretty standard across the world, especially as these figures look like they were taken pre-covid, pre-WFH. How do you see demand changing after Covid and increased residential-use of energy?\par
\par
Q3_To decarbonise heat, have you thought about micro-generation at building-level, what would you recommend as a viable micro-generation?\par
Steven Hayes (Hayestec) 10:25 AM \par
Thanks Tia\par
\par
Q1 : Theres a huge amount of research and innovation in the battery field. One aspect to keep your eye on would be 'sand' batteries, these have the potential to last 3 times as long. Lithium ion might also be overtaken by pure lithium (with a solid electrolyte) which would make them 4x more energy dense and remove the risk of fire. \par
\par
Q2: This is a really good question and difficult to answer. I think we can only truly know when the economy opens back up again. It's my view that the reductions we have seen will evaporate away once covid passes\par
\par
Q3: This very much depends on the building and its use. although i would advocate some caution at the 'grid' level,  most micro generation relies on grid backup. If you have large sites providing their baseload consumption then they meet their 'peak' requirements from the grid hence they would not adequately contribute the grid upkeep as we operate under a regulated asset base. Therefore we may need different policy for a massively decentralised system.\par
David Banks (Holymoor / Glasgow Univ) 09:25 AM  \par
Thankyou Steven...would it be rude to enquire whether you could cite some kind of average cost to consumer per kWh heat consumed in Nottingham? What is the price structure and does price fluctuate with demand??\par
Steven Hayes (Hayestec) 10:30 AM \par
Hi David, hope your well.\par
With respect to the heatnetwork you can find domestic unit rates publically here: {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://committee.nottinghamcity.gov.uk/documents/s9296/Domestic%20Tariff%20Report.pdf }}{\fldrslt{https://committee.nottinghamcity.gov.uk/documents/s9296/Domestic%20Tariff%20Report.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\par
The prices havn't changed significantly and it is cheaper for consumers than gas (when holistic costs are factored in as in the heat trust methodology)\par
Obviously the commercial rates vary and are too sensitive to share.\par
Its a fixed price, if you look at octopus agile tariff you can see a live half hour domestic tariff, which when combined with heatpumps offers significant savings vs the counterfactual.\par
Simon Lucas 09:38 AM  \par
Morning FLorian - at Dannenbaum, how did the project model the interface with aquifers ?  Thanks  Simon Lucas\par
Florian Hahn 10:02 AM \par
The 3D modell includes a large regional scale for the groundwater inflow, but mostly the system is dominated by the flow regime of the mine water drainage in the south-western part of the colliery.\par
Starcher, Vanessa E. 09:43 AM  \par
How accurate are the mine plans? What is the lateral error on the mine pathways?\par
Florian Hahn 10:08 AM \par
From our drilling experience the mine layouts are very accurate, but based on the conversion of reference systems, uncertainites can increase.\par
Fiona Todd 09:43 AM  \par
Florian - great presentation. In the Robert Muser site how much mine water are you abstracting? (sorry if I missed it). And at Dannenbaum have you done any modelling to determine if there's a potential for thermal feedback between your cold and heat stores?\par
Florian Hahn voudrait r\'e9pondre \'e0 cette question en direct.\par
LCraddock 09:44 AM  \par
How does the regulatory framework work in Germany? Yesterday we heard that it was onerous in the UK.\par
Florian Hahn 09:57 AM \par
We also face similar issues in Germany, but so far the authorities have been very supportive.\par
Peter Stanley 10:11 AM  \par
Hi G, could I have a recording of Mike's presentation or link to it? I'd like to share with my neighbour Len who is from Caerau & as a boy used to go see the "Fan Man" with his father occasionally at the mine. He's a top man, a former chemical engineer & he'd be interested to learn about the development & share with family whom still live there.\par
Farr, Gareth J. 10:12 AM \par
Hi Pete, if Mike gives us permssion to upload then we will and you can share. We will send email to all attendees in a few weeks with links. Thanks Pete.\par
Simon Lucas 10:18 AM  \par
Florian - is your 3D model bult in commercially available software, or have you \ldblquote programmed from first principles\rdblquote ?  Did you have seismic data to build the model with, or did you just go from mining geology records alone?  Thanks Simon Lucas\par
Florian Hahn 10:55 AM \par
Yes, the modeling was done by delta h with their SPRING software. So far, we could not include any seismic data yet. For our models we extracted all available geological and tectonic data, which are very extensive due to the long mining activities within the Ruhr area.\par
Henry Lang 10:25 AM  \par
Question for all. We need to take this forward as a collective group to keep and develop the ' learnins' from  these 2 days. Can we establish a Special Interest Group of some form?\par
Farr, Gareth J. 10:30 AM \par
great question - I will endevour to ask this question in the Q&A at the end.\par
Athena.Chalari 10:40 AM  \par
Florian - Great presentation. Are you using/or planning to use  any fibre optic distributed systems in the wells? (sorry if I missed it).\par
Florian Hahn 10:44 AM \par
Thanks! Yes, we are monitoring the temperature with DTS in our wells drilled into the colliery.\par
Henry Lang 10:43 AM  \par
Florian have you explored the use of Stirling heat engines for electricity generation? We have been looking at it for solar heat concentrators to extend the solar generation into the evening demand peak.\par
Florian Hahn 11:19 AM \par
In the first stage, we haven't looked into this part, but with the collectors (parabolic mirrors) this could be an option for future.\par
Jeroen van Hunen 10:51 AM  \par
Hi Florian, Another great talk! A question for that 2nd talk: from drilling through the back-filled parts of the mine (or from other information), would you be able to estimate the permeability of this back-filled material? How hydraulically connected are areas on either side?\par
Florian Hahn 11:09 AM \par
Many thanks! We still haven't fully analysed the data of the injection test, but results will follow. We definitely observed a decreased hydraulic conductivity within the back-filled material. So far we didn't observe any direct hydraulic connection between the different drifts.\par
Plenderleith, Gayle E. 11:03 AM  \par
Where mineworkings are shallow enough (I think above 50m, but could be shallower) they need to be grouted in order to build. Would this greatly impact the economic value of a site, as far as reinjection prospects? Do we know how/if closing off these shallower seams might impact the fluid flow properties of deeper seams?\par
Charlotte Adams 11:07 AM \par
Thanks Gayle, good point -  we don't expect to use workings above that depth because of ground stability concerns. Grouting operations also require a permit from us so we aware of where they are taking place and can bear this in mind when someone approaches us about licensing a mine energy scheme\par
Chris Dunham 11:10 AM  \par
So returning to aquifers vs mines question. Sounds like from Charlotte that UK mines are more interconnected than elsewhere in the world which limits their suitability. How important is interconnectedness vertically as well as horizontally?\par
Charlotte Adams 11:13 AM \par
For aqufers vs mines - it does depend on what the aquifer is but generally fewer boreholes are need for a mine energy system because the transmissivity of the mined system is that much higher. We do look carefully at seam  cross connections between seams because they could lead to heat short circuiting. We have one site where the BH are only a few m apart at surface but the flow path between abstraction and reinjection is around 13km.\par
\par
De Farr, Gareth J. \'e0 tout le monde:  09:00 AM\par
We hope so - we just need to get permission from all speakers first. We will email links to recordings in a few weeks.\par
GOOD MORNING. we will kick off in a minute or so - just give time for people to log in . ALL questions for speakers into the Q&A box please\par
De kevinmallin \'e0 tout le monde:  09:27 AM\par
I thoroughly recommend visiting IEG at Bochum, if you have any interest in Geothermal of any kind.\par
De David Kemp \'e0 tout le monde:  10:55 AM\par
Agreed - ambient loop does appear to offer an optimal solution. Commercial models for 'ownership and operation' of that loop can be based on other utilitiy infrastructure providers (DNOs, water companies etc) either in a variable / billed for basis or fixed 'standing charge' approach.\par
De Peter Stanley \'e0 tout le monde:  11:33 AM\par
Really salient preso Alison. BH construction & insulating/cementing successfully really important to plan & demonstrate energy abstraction. The Geo-observatory resonates with like minded work. Great all round preso's. Thanks to all panelists.\par
De Charlotte Adams \'e0 tout le monde:  11:34 AM\par
Here is the link to the Bridgend work - apolgs I got the researcher's surname wrong\par
{{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://orca.cf.ac.uk/138639/1/minewater%20report%202021%20incl%20summary.pdf }}{\fldrslt{http://orca.cf.ac.uk/138639/1/minewater%20report%202021%20incl%20summary.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\par
De Tia Kansara \'e0 tout le monde:  11:36 AM\par
Great to meet you - thanks for the fantastic conference, if anyone would like to be in touch I\rquote m on tia@replenish.earth\par
Hi Alison, nice update presentation and great to see how the UKGeoObs is moving along. Do you know when the inSAR reflectors will be installed?\par
Cette question a \'e9t\'e9 r\'e9pondue en direct\par
Alison Monaghan (BGS) 11:47 AM \par
as soon as travel is less restricted from England to Scotland and Covid H&S permits\par
Gus Fraser-Harris 11:29 AM  \par
Hi Alison, thanks for a great presentation. Please could you provide a little more information about the heatable temperature sensors? Are you able to heat discrete horizons and what temperatures can these go to?\par
Alison Monaghan (BGS) 11:50 AM \par
They are copper-cored down the fibre optic DTS cables.\par
Martin Crane 11:34 AM  \par
Is pumping energy significant in the overall heat pump system CoP when using mine heat eg Florian showed extraction from 810m and reinjection to 326m what is the pumping energy to achieve that?  Is it actually quite small as if it is all flooded the water is not actually being lifted 810m \f1\endash  have I got my physics correct?\par
Charlotte Adams 11:53 AM \par
Depends more on the depth to water below surface rather than the depth to the mine but you are correct can impact overall COP in the UK example pumping water from >100m may adversely impact COP unless you have free electricity\par
Fiona Todd 11:44 AM  \par
There's been a lot of talk about follow ups to this, possibly about a specialist working group. This is something I really think is necessary to progress these technologies further in the UK. How do we go about setting it up?\par
Bo voudrait r\f0\'e9pondre \'e0 cette question en direct.\par
Chris Dunham 11:51 AM \par
Thanks for the very useful response to Aquifers vs mines. How does depth to resource and pumping energy compare?\par
Charlotte Adams 11:55 AM \par
You're welcome Chris - you could see my reply to martin crane above\par
There is the IMWA virtual conference from Wales in July 2021. It's in NZ in 2022 & back to Wales in 2023.\par
}
 